Specify re-connect handling for different protocols #212 (#226)
eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec: up-l1/mqtt_5.adoc

===== Sending a Message
`UTransport::send(UMessage)` translates to the MQTT publish to topic `{UMessage.source.authority_name}/{UMessage.sink.authority_name}`

== MQTT5 Connection handling

=== Establishing a connection

> Establishing a connection to an MQTT broker *SHOULD* be done with `cleanSession = true` and `sessionExpiry = 0`. With those settings the broker will not buffer any messages while a the client is offline and will loose any subscriptions on a client disconnect. 

Reviewer: Please add the OFT tags like above for your requirements.

Author: Done via: 

[](https://github.com/jjj-vtm/up-spec/blob/d984eb005d26b15437f95337ada3c953c7687c09/up-l1/mqtt_5.adoc?plain=1#L240C1-L244C1)

> Establishing a connection to an MQTT broker *SHOULD* be done with `cleanSession = true` and `sessionExpiry = 0`. With those settings the broker will not buffer any messages while a the client is offline and will loose any subscriptions on a client disconnect. 

Reviewer: We actually might want to buffer messages in the broker for the scenario so vehicles can receive messages when they wakeup so I'm not sure if we want to make this a SHOULD. I think the transport needs to have a configuration option for this setting.

Author: Ok, I will rewrite it in a form that we want the transport to have the options. IMHO going with "stateless" ie. cleanSession = true and sessionExpiry=0 is the best way for scaling because it opens up some possible deployment topologies but if you have state ie. sessions you are basically tied to a clustered MQTT deployment.

Author: Addressed here: https://github.com/jjj-vtm/up-spec/blob/d984eb005d26b15437f95337ada3c953c7687c09/up-l1/mqtt_5.adoc?plain=1#L245C1-L258C1

=== Reconnection

> If a connection is lost the UTransport *MUST* try to reconnect to the MQTT broker. The client *SHOULD* implement a backoff retry strategy to avoid overloading the broker. If the client connected with `cleanSession = true` then after a successful reconnect the UTransport *MUST* re-register all the previosly registred UListener.

Reviewer: Add OFT traces and make each requirement a new line.  Please define the backoff strategy or the requirement is of type `req` and it needs `dsn` like this:

```
[.specitem,oft-sid="req~up-transport-mqtt5-reconnect-backoff~1",oft-needs="dsn"]
--
*  *SHOULD* implement a backoff retry strategy to avoid overloading the broker
--

```

Author: OFT added
https://github.com/jjj-vtm/up-spec/blob/d55ebba8cecf79e74ba916f265b3b3ee0ff0d1c3/up-l1/mqtt_5.adoc?plain=1#L261C1-L268C3

| true | 0 | Previous session data is deleted and state like messages, subscribtions etc. is lost if UTransport gets disconnected
| true | t>0 | Previous session data is deleted and new session will buffer data for time `t` if connection is lost
| false | t | Previous session including subscribtions, unreceived messages etc. is resumed and session will buffer data for time `t` if connection is lost
|===

Using a UTransport from the cloud side to connect to an MQTT broker we recommend to use `cleanSession=true` and `sessionExpiry=0` because we assume that there will always be at least one UTransport connected from the cloud which can handle messages so there is no need for buffering. 

Establishing an mqtt5 UTransport from a device there is no general recommendation. Using `cleanSession=true` and `sessionExpiry=0` might be best for scaling since it reduces the load on the MQTT broker. Doing this one needs to take special care for offline devices. Using `cleanSession=true` and `sessionExpiry=t` might stress the broker but the broker helps when dealing with offline devices.

--

=== Reconnection
[.specitem,oft-sid="req~up-transport-mqtt5-reconnection~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> If a connection is lost the UTransport *MUST* try to reconnect to the MQTT broker.  If on successfull reconnect the broker sends the `sessionPresent=false` flag then the UTransport *MUST* re-register all the previosly registred UListener. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a connection is lost, the UTransport *MUST* try to reconnect to the MQTT broker.  If on successfull reconnect the broker sends the `sessionPresent=false` flag, the UTransport *MUST* re-subscribe to all previously subscribed topics. 
```

--

[.specitem,oft-sid="req~up-transport-mqtt5-reconnection-backoff~1",oft-needs="impl,utest"]
--

> The client *MUST* implement a backoff strategy in order not to overload the MQTT broker. It *MUST* be possible to inject this strategy into the UTransport. The UTransport *MUST* implement the default strategy where the n+1-th reconnect is done after the n-th after a pause given by the following table:

Reviewer 2: > It *MUST* be possible to inject this strategy into the UTransport.

What is that supposed to mean? Should it be possible to enable/disable the backoff, or parameterize it? If so, how? Unless we are more specific in this point I would propose to simply require the transport to implement the standard exponential backoff algorithm and use always use it ...

Author: Idea was to allow custom backoff strategies. I agree that just specifying the standard exponential backoff is good enough.

Author: https://github.com/eclipse-uprotocol/up-spec/commit/08f440905b2457fbcecb7a72f805131b1d7b9780
